If literature were a criterion of a people's worth, England would stand very high indeed.
But such a criterion would be unfair to peoples like the Romans or Americans who have excelled
in action rather than expression. As the dream expresses the unconscious wishes and fears of the
individual, so literature with the other arts betrays the unconscious spirit of a people.
Literature reveals their hopes and their fears, and it is but natural that its exponents should be of
that type of humanity which is closest to nature and the unconscious. The more a people is
dominated by its conscious, the less will it express itself in literature although by a strange
exception it may do so in music. Thus the Greeks, with their strong Mediterranean admixture,
rank high in the world of letters; Germany also, before the Prussian domination; for both could
give free rein to their unconscious impulse; because she could not, Rome ranks low. But there
are two elements in art and literature; the dynamic and the static, inspiration and control; the
former is a long-headed character, and the latter short-headed. Thus peoples deficient in one
or the other element are deficient in expression. The Irish incline to exhibit too much
exuberance, the Romans too little.
England is fortunate in the same way as the Greeks in having the two racial elements
powerfully developed. The Nordic is not a maker of literature, nor does he understand it, but he
is nevertheless often a good patron. Our creative writers have been mainly of the Mediterranean
type and Keats was an outstanding example; the architectonics and moral fibre of Shakespeare on
the other hand betray a short-headed strain, which reminds us that the true Nordic makes one
great contribution to literature in that he at least inspires great poetry; thus Nordic heroes are the
great figures of the Homeric poems, of the Sagas, whilst Shakespeare presents us with a galaxy.
Since a people tends to work off its complexes and obsessions in its poetry, it generally
follows that the literature of fear is greater than the literature of joy, for in the former the
unconscious has freer play. Thus the Greeks excelled in tragedy while the Romans, practical men
of action, made no mark therein. We are reminded again of the difference between the Protestant
spirit and the Catholic, or between the Alpine and the Mediterranean, the former dominating God
and the second dominated by Him. The Romans had little fear from the outside world,
although tradition led them to toy with it; but with the Greeks this fear, together with a dread of
incest arising from a pristine uncertainty in marital relations, was a real dread which inspires
their greatest work.
While Shakespeare's expression is on the whole strong and jubilant there are occasional
phases of some such similar terror which may be of a personal nature, and under their influence,
as in Macbeth or King Lear, he is at his greatest.
